README.md, before:

# Dotfiles

This is primarily a guide for myself on how to setup my own systems, feel free to copy any of the dotfiles, but do not expect a direct copy of everything to work for you.

Make sure to follow the guide for each system step by step and to move over an SSH key for GitHub to get started with cloning the repository.
Then, clone the repository into `~/Developer/dotfiles` using SSH:

```zsh
git clone git@github.com:michaelbrusegard/dotfiles.git ~/Developer/dotfiles
```

> [!NOTE]
> I also maintain a private repository with soft and hard secrets that is added into the repository as a Nix flake. Directly copying the dotfiles will therefore most likely fail since it will fail to fetch the private repository.

Hard secrets are encrypted further inside the private repository using sops. To include them in the build, add the age keys to `~/.config/sops/age/keys.txt` and then do a rebuild.

## Reference links

- [nixpkgs](https://mynixos.com/nixpkgs/options)
- [nix-darwin](https://mynixos.com/nix-darwin/options)
- [home-manager](https://mynixos.com/home-manager/options)

## Desktop (NixOS)

### Screenshots

![2025-04-26_15-07-56](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd56268b-93b1-4bfd-9c1f-2a999428dd6e)

## Darwin systems

First install MacOS normally by following the instructions on the screen.

### Disabling SIP

System Integrity Protection (SIP) needs to be partially disabled for the [yabai](https://github.com/koekeishiya/yabai/wiki/Disabling-System-Integrity-Protection) tiling window manager to work correctly.

1. Turn off the mac, then press and hold the power button until "Loading startup options" appears.
   Click Options, then click Continue.

2. In the menu bar, choose `Utilities`, then `Terminal`

3. Run this:

```sh
csrutil enable --without fs --without debug --without nvram
```

After rebooting run this:

```sh
sudo nvram boot-args=-arm64e_preview_abi
```

Then reboot again.

### Command line tools

Install Xcode command line tools:

```sh
xcode-select --install
```

### Install Rosetta

```sh
softwareupdate --install-rosetta --agree-to-license
```

### Install Nix

Run the following command to install Nix:

```sh
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf -L https://install.determinate.systems/nix | \
  sh -s -- install
```

When prompted to install `Determinate Nix`, explicitly say `no`.

### Initial build

Build the system the first time using the following command:

```sh
nix run nix-darwin -- switch --flake $HOME/Developer/dotfiles
```

Later rebuilds can use the `rebuild` alias.

### Screenshots

## Espresso (Ubuntu Home Server)

### Installing packages

```sh
sh ~/dotfiles/espresso/scripts/apt.sh
```

### Setting up symlinks

```sh
cd ~/dotfiles/espresso && stow --adopt -t ~ home && sudo stow --adopt -t /etc etc && stow --adopt -t /data data && git restore .
```

### Setup login items

```sh
sh ~/dotfiles/espresso/scripts/login.sh
```

## Inspiration…

- Andrey0189's [Nix Hyprland configuration](https://github.com/Andrey0189/nixos-config-reborn/tree/master/home-manager/modules/hyprland)
- Notusknot's [nix-dotfiles](https://github.com/notusknot/dotfiles-nix)
- Mathias Bynens and his [MacOS defaults](https://github.com/mathiasbynens/dotfiles/blob/main/.macos)
- Dries Vints and his [SSH script](https://github.com/driesvints/dotfiles/blob/main/ssh.sh)
- Antione Martin and his [GPG script](https://github.com/antoinemartin/create-gpg-key/blob/main/create_gpg_key.sh)
- Elliot's fast and beautiful [.zshrc prompt](https://github.com/dreamsofautonomy/zensh/blob/main/.zshrc)
- [Michael Bao's dotfiles](https://github.com/tcmmichaelb139/.dotfiles)
- [Josean Martinez's dotfiles](https://github.com/josean-dev/dev-environment-files)
- [TheBlueRuby's awesome Arch Linux setup](https://github.com/TheBlueRuby/dotfiles-arch)
- [XLNC](https://github.com/naveenkrdy)

Commit message:

feat: finish setting up kanata and adding it to the readme

README.md, after:

# Dotfiles

This is primarily a guide for myself on how to setup my own systems, feel free to copy any of the dotfiles, but do not expect a direct copy of everything to work for you.

Make sure to follow the guide for each system step by step and to move over an SSH key for GitHub to get started with cloning the repository.
Then, clone the repository into `~/Developer/dotfiles` using SSH:

```zsh
git clone git@github.com:michaelbrusegard/dotfiles.git ~/Developer/dotfiles
```

> [!NOTE]
> I also maintain a private repository with soft and hard secrets that is added into the repository as a Nix flake. Directly copying the dotfiles will therefore most likely fail since it will fail to fetch the private repository.

Hard secrets are encrypted further inside the private repository using sops. To include them in the build, add the age keys to `~/.config/sops/age/keys.txt` and then do a rebuild.

## Reference links

- [nixpkgs](https://mynixos.com/nixpkgs/options)
- [nix-darwin](https://mynixos.com/nix-darwin/options)
- [home-manager](https://mynixos.com/home-manager/options)

## Desktop (NixOS)

### Screenshots

![2025-04-26_15-07-56](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cd56268b-93b1-4bfd-9c1f-2a999428dd6e)

## Darwin systems

First install MacOS normally by following the instructions on the screen.

### Disabling SIP

System Integrity Protection (SIP) needs to be partially disabled for the [yabai](https://github.com/koekeishiya/yabai/wiki/Disabling-System-Integrity-Protection) tiling window manager to work correctly.

1. Turn off the mac, then press and hold the power button until "Loading startup options" appears.
   Click Options, then click Continue.

2. In the menu bar, choose `Utilities`, then `Terminal`

3. Run this:

```sh
csrutil enable --without fs --without debug --without nvram
```

After rebooting run this:

```sh
sudo nvram boot-args=-arm64e_preview_abi
```

Then reboot again.

### Command line tools

Install Xcode command line tools:

```sh
xcode-select --install
```

### Install Rosetta

```sh
softwareupdate --install-rosetta --agree-to-license
```

### Install Nix

Run the following command to install Nix:

```sh
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf -L https://install.determinate.systems/nix | \
  sh -s -- install
```

When prompted to install `Determinate Nix`, explicitly say `no`.

### Initial build

Build the system the first time using the following command:

```sh
nix run nix-darwin -- switch --flake $HOME/Developer/dotfiles
```

Later rebuilds can use the `rebuild` alias.

### Keyboard daemon for kanata

Download the [Karabiner-DriverKit-VirtualHIDDevice](https://github.com/pqrs-org/Karabiner-DriverKit-VirtualHIDDevice/tree/main/dist) manually and install the package. Afterwards make sure it is enabled in System Settings, General -> Login Items & Extensions -> Driver Extensions (At the bottom).

Also make sure that `/run/current-system/sw/bin/kanata` is added as an allowed application under Security & Privacy -> Input Monitoring.

Lastly, go to Keyboard -> Keyboard Shortcuts... -> Modifier Keys, and make sure the Karabiner DriverKit VirtualHIDDevice is selected for the keyboard you are using.

The nix configuration should handle the rest, for any problems check out [this discussion](https://github.com/jtroo/kanata/discussions/1537) in the kanata repository.

### Screenshots

## Espresso (Ubuntu Home Server)

### Installing packages

```sh
sh ~/dotfiles/espresso/scripts/apt.sh
```

### Setting up symlinks

```sh
cd ~/dotfiles/espresso && stow --adopt -t ~ home && sudo stow --adopt -t /etc etc && stow --adopt -t /data data && git restore .
```

### Setup login items

```sh
sh ~/dotfiles/espresso/scripts/login.sh
```

## Inspiration…

- Andrey0189's [Nix Hyprland configuration](https://github.com/Andrey0189/nixos-config-reborn/tree/master/home-manager/modules/hyprland)
- Notusknot's [nix-dotfiles](https://github.com/notusknot/dotfiles-nix)
- Mathias Bynens and his [MacOS defaults](https://github.com/mathiasbynens/dotfiles/blob/main/.macos)
- Dries Vints and his [SSH script](https://github.com/driesvints/dotfiles/blob/main/ssh.sh)
- Antione Martin and his [GPG script](https://github.com/antoinemartin/create-gpg-key/blob/main/create_gpg_key.sh)
- Elliot's fast and beautiful [.zshrc prompt](https://github.com/dreamsofautonomy/zensh/blob/main/.zshrc)
- [Michael Bao's dotfiles](https://github.com/tcmmichaelb139/.dotfiles)
- [Josean Martinez's dotfiles](https://github.com/josean-dev/dev-environment-files)
- [TheBlueRuby's awesome Arch Linux setup](https://github.com/TheBlueRuby/dotfiles-arch)
- [XLNC](https://github.com/naveenkrdy)
